Last week I was at linux.conf.au 2015 in Auckland.  I presented two
talks, on one property-based testing at the testing and automation
miniconf, and a FreeIPA talk.  I also attended many interesting
talks - details of some of these are below and at [1] - and had many
fruitful conversations with people explaining and answering
questions about FreeIPA.

Not only developers but many sysadmins attend LCA, and there was a
lot of interest in FreeIPA.  I hope to use this momentum and submit
a more in-depth tutorial proposal for next year.  I also have some
questions about parts of FreeIPA I need to learn more about.  Read
on below for more info!

Briefly, in other Red Hat projects, there were some presentations
and a bit of buzz about Project Atomic and about OpenShift v3 (based
on Docker and Kubernetes), which was nice to see.

[1] https://github.com/frasertweedale/notes-conf/tree/master/lca2015


My FreeIPA talk
===============

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZXsNt2_Ie8

The FreeIPA talk was in one of the smaller theatres (75 seats) but
they should have scheduled it for a larger room because it was
completely filled and unfortunately a few people were turned away.

The popularity of the FreeIPA talk was probably helped by some
shout-outs in earlier talks.  *Advanced Linux server-side threats*
plugged FreeIPA's OTP support useful defensive measure.  *Stories
from the Samba 3 -> 4 transision* endorsed FreeIPA for managing
Linux/UNIX domains.

Given the popularity of the session, I will proposing a FreeIPA
tutorial for linux.conf.au 2016.  Tutorial sessions are usually 1.5
hours so it is enough time to install server and enroll clients,
Kerberize web services, configure OTP and maybe define custom
attributes or other activities.  There is no hurry to start planning
the proposal (CfP is six months away) but if anyone has run
something similar, could you share your advice or materials?


Questions people had:

- Does FreeIPA have mechanism to detect if there are duplicate users
  in AD and FreeIPA?

  - I answered "no" but that writing a script to check for
    duplicates would not be difficult.

- I obviously confused someone when I was talking about features for
  RHEL 7.1 because they asked why wasn't it in RHEL.  But I cleared
  that up.

- Custom LDAP attributes?

  - I should make it clear that this is doable and include
    a pointer to the HOWTO in my slides (or at least mention it)

- Migration?

  - Again I should method this.  Perhaps a slides about what we
    offer for *migrating* to freeipa.

- There was question about delegation of the domain administration
  such that delegates can only manage identities belonging to
  particular groups or OUs.  I wasn't sure on that, and directed the
  questioner to the mailing list.  Can someone speak to this?

- "A lot of our developers run Macs. Has any of this been tested
  with OS X?"  I answered that I wasn't sure whether people had done
  this but given that OS X is Unix, even if it is not possible today
  it would probably not be much effort for basic support.

- One gentleman asked about Windows Group Policy and whether FreeIPA
  can interpret it.  I didn't really understand the question but
  suggested he ask on freeipa-users.

- "We can have Linux clients as clients of AD so what's the benefit
  of putting FreeIPA into the mix?"

  I answered that the advantage is that groups can manage the
  identites they are responsible for in the way that makes sense for
  them, according to the OS/platform they are using, and then having
  interoperability between the domains.

  But he responded that their AD admins were happy managing Unix
  servers so it didn't make sense for them to add FreeIPA to the
  mix.  I thought "OK fair enough then."  Is there any compelling
  argument for FreeIPA in this situation?


Other comments:

- People are excited about CAMMAC/AI and the policies that will
  enable.  And want to know when they can have it :)

- People asked about user certificates.  In particular, one
  administrator wants to provision code signing certificates for
  users.  I explained that full support in FreeIPA was coming later
  with profile management and (ideally) sub-CAs for a separate
  security domain, but that if it is needed today Dogtag can be used
  directly.

- Some people wondered about whether there is duplication of effort
  between Samba and FreeIPA efforts.  I wasn't aware of how similar
  some of recent goals and development of Samba 4 is, compared to
  FreeIPA.  The main difference seems to be that Samba is pursuing
  full support for Windows clients where FreeIPA is focusing on
  Linux clients and AD interop via trusts.

  A lot of the behaviour - configure a DS, Kerberos, DNS, etc - is
  the same stuff, so concern about duplicated effort is
  understandable.  But the components are mostly different, even
  down to Kerberos (Samba DC is using Heimdal).  So I don't know
  what could be done to improve the situation, short of FreeIPA
  adding full support for Windows clients, group policy, etc,
  presumably via Samba somehow.  Maybe there are technical or
  strategic reasons against this possibility.  I would be interested
  to hear others' comments - from people who understand the Samba
  project better or have been around longer than I.

- I have a few people to follow up with about discussions we had /
  FreeIPA use cases for their clients or organisations.  In
  particular, one person was interested in hosting FreeIPA instances
  for customers; we only had a brief discussion so I will ask in
  more detail about use cases and explore solutions that could be
  feasible.  Dmitri, I will copy you when I email him, probably
  tomorrow.


Other talks
===========

Keynote - Bob Young
-------------------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tvxs2hkhZq0

Bob Young spoke about commercialising innovation, Red Hat's
strategic advantage in giving customers control over technology,
software licensing, the free market and regulation.


Stories from the Samba 3 -> Samba 4 transition
----------------------------------------------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r6Cp-4p0jj4

Andrew Bartlett on the Samba 4 AD DC goals, accomplishments and
migration nightmares.  It seems to be solving a lot of the same
problems as FreeIPA (easy setup, secure by default, sensible default
policies) but for an AD domain.  Andrew also briefly plugs FreeIPA,
outlining this difference.


Advanced Linux Server-side Threats
----------------------------------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L9tjcB_ij-0

A look at some advanced Linux/UNIX malware, how it spreads, infects
and avoids detection.  Covered incident response and defense towards
the end of the talk.  FreeIPA 2FA got a shout-out.

I spoke with the present Olivier Bilodeau who was keen to learn more
about FreeIPA's OTP support and I directed him to my blog post on
the design.


Crypto won't save you either
----------------------------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ahcUuNO4so

An overview of many different ways crypto has been bypassed.
Emphasised that security issues are almost always implementation
issues.  Presenter also expresses concern about NSA influence over
standards and corporations, e.g. NIST curves, RSA Dual_EC_DRBG
controversy, and about standards standing in the way of fixing /
disabling old or broken crypto, e.g. FIPS 140.


OneRNG
------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jiy1rlKdBo8

Low cost, Kickstarter-backed open hardware entropy device with open
source drivers.  Designed for verifiability.

I asked if they would follow up the OneRNG with "OneHSM" but they
said they had other projects.


When your codebase is nearly old enough to vote
-----------------------------------------------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G45hqWNScvE

A look at advantages and disadvantages, and other important factors
when considering whether to rewrite [parts of] old codebases.  The
talk was based on a service with users rather than software
distributed to users, but a lot of the factors would be relevant to
our codebases as well.


Gerrit and Gertty - a daily habit
---------------------------------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rp317mfo3Qg

A talk about code review tools that was really a talk about
techniques for habit formation.  Some really good advice in here.

Gerrit is nice - I have used it at previous jobs - but it wasn't
really the focus of the talk.


Security Development Lifecycle: theory and techniques
-----------------------------------------------------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kGewMn5ff1g

Discredits traditional assumptions about security of open source
software and recommends developer education, Security Development
Lifecycle (esp. threat modelling and ranking and static code
analysis), strong project security teams, easy software updates.
