linux.conf.au 2017 trip report
==============================

linux.conf.au 2017 was held in Hobart, Tasmania on 16-20 January.

On the Tuesday I ran the Security & Privacy Miniconf which covered a
range of topics.  Some particular talks of interest are described
and linked below.  I also did a very short FreeIPA update to talk
about new and upcoming security features (Sub-CAs, AuthInd, NBDE,
session recording).

- Joey Hess did a talk[1] about *Keysafe* [2]: a key backup solution
  he implemented that makes use of argon2 and Shamir's Secret
  Sharing (among other things).

- Rob N from FastMail gave a talk on *U2F* [3].  I have acquired a
  U2F Zero device and wonder what I can do with it in FreeIPA?  Are
  customers asking about U2F?

- Chris Biggs' presentation about *IoT security*[4].  I used to work
  with Chris at two previous companies; he is a great guy and smart.
  The Register did a write-up of his talk[5].

[1] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kzXXcr8TyJY
[2] https://keysafe.branchable.com/
[3] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vv11XMG5UJg
[4] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qKJz4aPubNI
[5] https://www.theregister.co.uk/2017/01/19/iot_will_get_worse_before_it_gets_better_dev_tells_linux_conference/

In the hallway track, I met many people who were using or were
interested in FreeIPA.  Mostly the usual questions: direct
integration vs trusts, Samba 4 trusts.  I had lots of conversations
about NBDE and explaining McCallum-Relyea to people.  I heard
FreeIPA mentioned in more talks than at previous conferences, even
software projects I hadn't heard of that are integrating with it,
like Pallet Jack[6], a lightweight configuration management system
being developed by Saab.

[6] https://github.com/saab-simc-admin/palletjack/pull/91

Anecdotally, hosting or infrastructure providers increasingly seem
to be offering hosted PKI solutions, e.g. Hashicorp Vault.  I do not
know the details of what they offer but it demonstrates that there
is value in making PKI easier for customers and solving the common
use cases well.  Competition is increasing.

Some other talks of interest:

- William's *Rust / C integration* talk.  I hope DS goes big on
  Rust.  There must be many other projects in Red Hat that could
  benefit, too.  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AWnza5JX7jQ

- *At-rest encryption in OpenStack Swift*.  Seems to be a well
  thought out design.  There is a master secret from which
  individual keys for objects are derived (via HMAC).  We should
  make sure there is support for getting the master secret via
  Tang/Clevis.  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HRRbogFZEcU

- *libtls* talk by LibreSSL developer Joel Sing about their new,
  user-centric TLS API.  Good API-design lessons for all of us
  working on security products.
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wd_dyRbE4AA

- *Managing Internal PKI at Scale with Anchor* by Stan Pitucha.  HP
  Cloud's PKI solution.  The solution apparently involves Certmonger
  but details are unclear.  It would be good to have an Anchor
  renewal helper in Certmonger and I intend to follow up on this.
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nhRPlDSgFhE

- *Managing performance parameters through systemd* by Sander van
  Vugt.  Good introduction to CPUShares and systemd slices, and how
  to manage them to achieve a desired resource allocation.
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6wrmKDb3kAo

- *Python profiling and performance tuning* by Joe Gordon
  (Pintrest).  Very useful overview of python profiling techniques
  and their relative benefits/drawbacks.
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bectZn_yNwg

- *Samba: the road to 10000 users* by Andrew Bartlett (Catalyst).
  Main takeaway for me is that we should be constantly measuring our
  performance in benchmarks of interest.  I don't think we are doing
  much of this, e.g., how long does it take to issue a cert?  How
  would we know if performance regressed?
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MvthtQc5TmA

- *Thin LVM + KVM tips and tricks* by Steven Ellis (Red Hat, NZ).
  If you've got an SSD and use VMs, watch this talk!
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X4sLpGdGQjc
