Open Source Developers' Conference 2015 report
==============================================

OSDC 2015 was held at Wrest Point hotel in Hobart, Tasmania.  It was
my first time in Tasmania - it is a small but very pretty harbour
city.

The conference was smaller than in previous years but still had many
interesting technical presentations.  I ran a 2-hour FreeIPA
workshop which was successful and led to some interesting
discussions.  The review of my workshop and outlines of other
presentations follow.


FreeIPA workshop
----------------

There were about 10 participants.  Based on a run-through with some
Brisbane staff last week, I decided that a bit more material was
needed so I wrote an additional module on service cert management
with Certmonger during the flight down.

As predicted, only a few of the attendees had done the preparation
to install Vagrant + VirtualBox and download the VM image.  I had
the needed bits on a couple of USB sticks and soon everyone was up
and running except for one person who couldn't get VirtualBox to
work (he still stayed and was interested, followed along and asked
questions etc).  One attendee had a very weak "netbook" and
ipa-server-install was failing due to timeout waiting for CA to come
up.  He ssh'd into his home machine and did the whole workshop
there!

Based on the experience with setup and the higher numbers expected I
think I would want about 10 4G USB sticks for my linux.conf.au
FreeIPA workshop next year.

The workshop itself, once people were up and running, went very
smoothly.  Most participants were working slightly ahead of my
demonstration of the material, and noone was far behind.  HBAC and
web app authentication was a real "light bulb" experience for some.
Everyone (except the false starter) completed the workshop
curriculum without too much time remaining, so the Certmonger module
was definitely worth it.  The linux.conf.au workshop will be shorter
so I don't think I need to do anything to the curriculum.

Some of the questions that came up:

- *Why doesn't the KDC refuse to hand out a service ticket if HBAC
  will deny access to the host/service?*  I indicated that this is
  technically feasible in the Kerberos protocol but too much
  complexity for KDC and counterproductive where there are
  time-based access control policies.  Are there other aspcets to
  this that I have omitted?

- *Why doesn't user automatically get TGT on a host upon login?*  I
  thought that this was possible but I'm not sure how to configure
  it.  Can anyone point to docs or fill me in here?

- The usual questions and answers about "what about nginx/etc" for
  web app authentication.

I made a Google Forms form[1] to collect feedback.  Only a few
people responded but on the "would recommend or deploy FreeIPA"
questions (scale 1 to 5 being "Never" to "Highly likely") we went
from [1,2,3] before the workshop to [3,4,5] afterwards, which if
reflective of the whole group is a good result.  There was also some
constructive feedback about how some parts of the workshop were run,
and one respondent stated that they would have liked replica
deployment to be part of the workshop.

[1] https://goo.gl/forms/P11DtfJiNq

After the workshop I had a discussion with a person who is gathering
requirements and evaluating IdM infra for an Australian political
party.  Their requirements include public signup and password
reset/management so I pointed him to Community Portal and suggested
it should be considered when evaluating how FreeIPA meets their
needs.  Because he participated in the workshop I am sure he will
give FreeIPA due consideration :)

Another participant discussed a client case he had, needing to
produce OpenID Connect and SAML assertions for users in AD, and
wondered how we could help.  I pointed him toward Ipsilon.

Other discussions and anecdotes were about external authentication,
how easy it was to get Kerberos up and running with FreeIPA and the
productivity gains it can bring even in very small organisations
(i.e. few people) but with lots of systems involved.


Network insecurity - a love story
---------------------------------

This was a general network security talk but at one point the
presenter praised SSO including Kerberos and client X.509 certs,
mentioning that although they are difficult to set up they work very
well.  This provided a useful opportunity to promote the FreeIPA
workshop (which was later in the conf) during questions.  Hopefully
the audience are less scared of enterprise SSO now, or at least more
aware that it can be worth the effort!


HTTP by the numbers
-------------------

This presentation was about HTTP performance and how HTTP/2
addresses some of the problems with HTTP/1 through multiplexing,
server push and header compression (essentially making it a binary
protocol).  It was also made clear that although HTTP/2 has a
non-secure (i.e. non-TLS) mode specified, no browser vendors will
implement it so the push toward HTTP/2 may see increased demand for
X.509 certs to protect resources that noone cared that much about
delivering over TLS before.

How a client decides to talk HTTP/2 to a server is interesting - the
*Application Layer Protocol Negotiation* (ALPN) TLS extension (RFC
7301) is used in the ClientHello to advertise protocols the client
is willing to speak.  The server picks one (e.g. HTTP/2) and informs
client in the ServerHello.  In this way HTTP/2 can be negotiated
without additional roundtrips.


SubPos - a "dataless" WiFi positioning system
---------------------------------------------

SubPos is a protocol designed for indoor (or elsewhere where GPS
cannot be used) positioning based on overloading SSID in 802.11
beacon frames with geolocation data and trilaterating receiver
position based on advertised location and signal strength of
received frames.

It is an interesting idea but you cannot really get any security
(authentication) in 31 bytes.  The current approach is to discard
"outlier" beacons (not robust).  In discussions after the talk the
presenter mentioned that the paper[2] from Microsoft Research on
which SubPos was based does describe transmitting more data across a
sequence of frames which would allow larger payload and permit
security, but it is a side-project and he does not seem very
interested in pursuing this.

[2] http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/73482/beaconstuffing.pdf


Deo lightning talk
------------------

I did a 5min lightning talk on Deo.  This time I showed of the
Apache TLS private key decryption and the full disk encryption which
did work but, alas, I ran out of time!  Nevertheless the audience
saw the ``deo encrypt`` and ``deo cryptsetup`` commands at work and
were impressed.

Right afterwards Paul Wayper (Red Hat GSS, Canberra) came to discuss
it and said that he had a customer asking for the exact thing in the
last week; customers already asking for it is a good sign!


Web security workshop
---------------------

A general web security workshop where you get to do some simple
exploits of common web vulnerabilities (injection, XSS etc).

Something new I learned about was the W3C "Subresource Integrity"
standard[3] which introduces the "integrity" attribute for
``<link>`` and ``<script>`` tags.  It contains a digest of the
resource and if third-party stylesheet/script host or your CDN gets
compromised / MitM'd the browser will notice when the digest doesn't
match and refuse to load the resource.

[3] http://www.w3.org/TR/SRI/
